## Data

### Unlabeled data
42,978,660 IMU items (716311 data points of length 60, also known as bursts or fixes), 3.1 GB (zipped: 458 MB) from CG_KREUPEL, LBBG_TEXEL, HG_TEXEL, CP_OMAN: From `226` GPS timestamp files per device, only `63` had 60-group length, based on my 10-attempt code (`available_60points.csv`). From 10 GPS timestamp attempts, if 1 returns, I use the device. 

Of the 42,978,660 IMU items, 19,830,960 (CG_KREUPEL, LBBG_TEXEL, HG_TEXEL) are Gull data, and 23,147,700 are Crop Plover data (CP_OMAN).

The code to get the data is in `scripts/get_data.py`.

### Labeled data

The data is a combination of several datasets annotated by different annotators. Each individual dataset is in a different format, and there is overlap between them. The pipeline is used in `scripts/prepare_labeled_data.py` to create the final data.

These datasets are:

```
s_data: (Publish data. set1 Json format)
j_data: (Suzanne Json)
m_data: (Suzanne Matlab)
w_data: (Willem Csv)
```

Considerations

- The IMU and GPS are rounded and then saved with a precision of 1e-6.
- It is possible to have the same IMU and GPS values. This issue is resolved by looking at three IMU and GPS items.
- Data can start from the middle of a burst (index not divisible by 20). Since we take bursts of 20 items, there are several ways to account for that. The rules are defined in `get_rules`. 
    - Shift each item by one and take 20 elements. This can also be implemented in data augmentation.
    - Mapping all data to values divisible by 20. (Old version in `exp/prepare_labeled_data`)
    - Other options: take the start of the signal, a random part of the signal, or sample at a regular step.
- j_data, m_data have extra classes. The Float_groyne and Handling_mussel classes are mapped to Float and Pecking, respectively; the other classes are removed.
- j_data uses different ids for the same labels (remap: s_map0)
- j_data, s_data: 10 and 20 items per burst, respectively. 
- m_data, w_data: data of different lengths.

Here is the number of labels:

```
{0: 'Flap', 1: 'ExFlap', 2: 'Soar', 3: 'Boat', 4: 'Float', 5: 'SitStand', 6: 'TerLoco', 7: 'Other', 8: 'Manouvre', 9: 'Pecking'}
s_data: {0: 634, 1: 38, 2: 501, 3: 176, 4: 558, 5: 894, 6: 318, 7: 25, 8: 151, 9: 210}
j_data: {0: 216, 1: 19, 2: 146, 3: 0,   4: 460, 5: 375,  6: 127, 7: 10, 8: 47,  9: 66}
m_data: {0: 5,   1: 0,  2: 0,   3: 0,   4: 0,   5: 642,  6: 23,  7: 0,  8: 0,   9: 187}
w_data: {0: 652, 1: 45, 2: 504, 3: 176, 4: 558, 5: 806,  6: 304, 7: 30, 8: 143, 9: 153}
shift : {0: 8145, 1: 497, 2: 6074, 3: 1888, 4: 8443, 5: 22807,  6: 4377, 8: 1648, 9: 4245}
```

Example row of the CSV format:

```bash
# no index (index==-1)
         0                    1  2  3         4         5         6         7
0      608  2013-05-31 02:12:41 -1  6 -1.020301 -0.305263  1.234586  0.186449
# with index
         0                    1  2  3         4         5         6         7
0      608  2013-05-31 02:12:41 20  6 -1.020301 -0.305263  1.234586  0.186449
```

### Previous Data preparation

#### There were some issues with the previous version:

    - Combining the items into bursts: We took the first label as the label of the burst. Now, priority labels are defined in get_rules.
    - Label StandForage used as Pecking. Now it is removed.
    - There was a bug in m_data. The labels were shifted if the items didn’t start from the beginning index. A maximum of 52 labels could have been wrong (test_issue_previous_m_data_format). Note that this is an upper bound. This is a minor issue.
    - Up to three items might have the same IMU and GPS speed. Previously, it was assumed only two. This is a very minor issue, since only a few items had this problem. It appears during reindexing by getting the index from the database.
    - The algorithm to find the closest value divisible by 20 had a minor issue with rounding. In Python, rounded values are to the closest even number. E.g., 2.5 is rounded to 2.0 instead of 3.0.

#### Description

The previous data preparation shifted the data to the closest value divisible by 20. So in the end, each data entry contains a burst of 20.

Data preparation is in `exp/prepare_labeled_data`. Here are the steps:

- Convert the original data to the CSV format
- Get all data from the database
- Map to the closest value divisible by 20 and get the index from the database. Data was previously downloaded using device ID and dates.
- Combine data (`combined.csv`)
- Remove duplicates (`combined_unique.csv`)
- Sort data by device and date in increasing index order (`combined_unique_sorted012.csv`).
- Manual correction by experts. The ground truth IMU figures were generated by `exps/save_plots_gt.py`. The correction is in the `corrections.txt` file and resulted in `corrected_combined_unique_sorted012.csv`.

> Balanced Data (`balance.csv`): For some experiments, I balanced the data by removing some rare classes and making the remaining classes have an equal number of instances based on the smallest class size. It is generated in data.py::balance_data by keeping {0: 'Flap', 1: 'Soar', 2: 'Float', 3: 'SitStand', 4: 'TerLoco', 5: 'Pecking'}.

In total, an extra 1235 bursts (c_data - s_data) were obtained. The "Other" class is excluded.

```
s_data: 3478  (Publish data. set1 Json format)
j_data: 1456  (Suzanne Json)
m_data: 857   (Suzanne Matlab)
w_data: 3341  (Willem Csv)
c_data: 4713  (Combined and duplicates removed without "other" class)
c_data: 4694  (Corrected c_data)
```

Here is the number of labels:

```
{0: 'Flap', 1: 'ExFlap', 2: 'Soar', 3: 'Boat', 4: 'Float', 5: 'SitStand', 6: 'TerLoco', 7: 'Other', 8: 'Manouvre', 9: 'Pecking'}
s_data: {0: 634, 1: 38, 2: 501, 3: 176, 4: 558, 5: 894, 6: 318, 7: 25, 8: 151, 9: 210}
j_data: {0: 216, 1: 19, 2: 146, 3: 0,   4: 460, 5: 375,  6: 127, 7: 10, 8: 47,  9: 66}
m_data: {0: 5,   1: 0,  2: 0,   3: 0,   4: 0,   5: 642,  6: 23,  7: 0,  8: 0,   9: 187}
w_data: {0: 652, 1: 45, 2: 504, 3: 176, 4: 558, 5: 806,  6: 304, 7: 30, 8: 143, 9: 153}
```

### Data in memory

#### CSV files

CSV files read by pandas are more efficient that reading py pure python or csv library. It is due to memory management such as contiguous block of memory and garbage collector, for-loop inefficiency of the pure python code and overhead due to dynamic typing and so on. For data above, only pandas version worked and used only 50% of memory wille pure python and csv reader killed by the process due to huge memory consumption, even using garbage collector `gc.collect()`. The experiment is in `panda_csv_python_read_data_in_memory.py`.

#### Older method to generate labeled data

The older method is sandboxed in `sandbox_prepare_label_data` branch and in `scripts/prepare_labeled_data.py` file.

Older methods to generate data are:

- Method1: combine only based on device id and dates. This part is missing a lot of data.
- Method2: combine with device id, dates and labels. This part is has bug. 

These methods are slow since it request data directly from database. The method1 and method2 have the common part in getting data from the database. But the combined part differs. 

The combined part of the method 2 is the same as current method in `scripts/prepare_labeled_data.py`. 

> BUG of Method2 is in `write_j_data`, `write_m_data`: The data might be 0-19, 40-59 with label1 and 20-39 label2. Then 0-40 gets label1, and 20-40 label2. This caused because the maximum length is calculated based on common labels.

## Models

Number of parameters:

- Small Model: 6,309
- MaskedAutoencoderViT: 9,546,756
- TransformerEncoderMAE: 4,748,297

```python
from behavior import model as bm, model1d as bm1
model = bm.BirdModel(4, 30, 9)
model = bm1.MaskedAutoencoderViT(img_size=20, in_chans=4, patch_size=1, embed_dim=256, depth=6, num_heads=8, decoder_embed_dim=256, decoder_depth=6, decoder_num_heads=8, mlp_ratio=4, layer_norm_eps=1e-6)
model = bm1.TransformerEncoderMAE(img_size=20, in_chans=4, out_chans=9, embed_dim=256, depth=6, num_heads=8, mlp_ratio=4, drop=0.0, layer_norm_eps=1e-6)
f"{sum([p.numel() for p in model.parameters()]):,}"
```

#### Small Bird Model

The bird model consists of three 1-D convolution layers, each with a kernel size of 3 and 30 channels. Each convolution layer is followed by batch normalization and a ReLU nonlinearity. The final projection layer is a linear layer that maps the average pooled embeddings to the number of classes. Cross-entropy loss is used as the classification loss. During training, dropout with a probability of 0.25 is applied after each convolution layer. The dataset for training consists of 3,505 labeled samples, each with 3 IMU accelerations and one GPS 2D speed for a sequence length of 20. There are 9 classes in total. AdamW is used for optimization with a learning rate of 3e-4 and a weight decay of 1e-2, with a maximum of 4,000 iterations. The learning rate scheduler is StepLR with a step size of 2,000, reducing the learning rate by a factor of 0.1. With this small dataset and model, the total training time is only 20 minutes using an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3070 laptop GPU.


## List of scripts

#### Save IMU plots

- `exps/save_plots_gt.py`: save IMU plots for ground truth data based on device id and starting times.
- `exps/save_plots.py`: save IMU plots for each label, run inference for the predictions. 
- `exps/birdvis_query.py`: Generate query file to directly import in the birdvis tool.
- `exps/exps1`: Inference and save the metrics
- `exps/imu_3d_movie`: make a movie from IMU data
- `exps/panda_csv_python_read_data_in_memory`: check performance of panda, csv and pure python on reading large data in the memory 
- `exps/visualize`: old (I should remove)
- `exps/cluster_behavior.py`: unsupervised clustering
- `exps/ss_cluster_behavior.py`: semi-supervised clustering